alright ladies and gentlemen welcome to
our talk and I it is my pleasure to
introduce to you
Edwin Brady now I want to see how much
you know about Edwin Brady he is a
lecturer at st. Andrews I see a very
enthusiastic it's a very enthusiastic I
see favors for a dependent type system
called
it white space indeed that was it then
you're ahead of the curve he's also
famous for white space and interest is
called T mmm-hmm complete no detrás
complete very good why is the call
takers complete well we'll come to that
oh no they're actually called Pacman
completes but I think they're equivalent
that's probably a theorem no no I've got
a I've got a constructive proof of a
step on the way but we'll see we'll see
that and his favorite beer is Budweiser
correct arrest that man
all right ladies and gentlemen please a
warm applause for that's mine yes okay
so thank you very much for the
introduction also thank you very much to
John for inviting me
it's um I don't know I don't quite know
why he invited me because to be honest I
don't actually know any scholar my my
link to skull is a little bit tenuous
some of you might have seen a couple
years ago I gave a talk with miles
comparing Scala to Idris and that's kind
of my link so my experience of Scala is
playing around with shapeless which is
kind of like running before you can walk
so I've been I've been letting these
talks kind of wash over me trying to get
the ideas rather than thinking too much
about the syntax and I've picked up a
lot of very interesting ideas from from
the tops that I've seen and I hope that
you'll pick some in return and the most
important thing is even if I don't but
I'm not really here to convert you from
being scholar programs to being interest
programmers I'm really here because I
want you to steal my ideas
so if you can pick up some ideas that
you see in a dress that you think you
can apply to your scale of programs or
more widely then please do just to say
another thing about about that talk with
with miles what what actually haven't is
yes yes here
so what we what we did was I wrote a
couple of idiots programs and and they
were basically challenges for miles
I wrote programs using the full
dependent type system in Icarus and said
okay miles can you do that and to my
amazement I shouldn't have been amazed
but to my amazement he did so this talk
is going to be the next step in that
game so so we'll see what happens
excellent challenge accepted said miles
look the video didn't get that so
internet miles step challenge accepted
right so a few people have asked over
the last couple days where I'm from I'm
from st. Andrews and so now he's in
Scotland and one thing that you may or
may not know about Scotland is that it
is it is in some sense the spiritual
home of functional programming in that
Haskell arose from Scotland ml it was a
Scottish programming language and and we
now fly the flag in Scotland to reflect
this important bit of the nation's
history so it seems only right that you
know I should present another Scottish
programming a Scottish functional
programming language okay so I'm gonna
talk about a dress it's a pacman
complete functional programming language
and by pac-man complete I basically mean
that there is enough available there
that if you wanted to you could
implement pac-man so people talk about
you know if a new language appears
people think is it your people asked is
it your incomplete they might worry if
it's not quite - your incomplete but I
think that's not really that not really
that useful thing to say about something
wide space for example is steering
complete but it's not pac-man complete
again maybe someone will accept that as
a challenge to prove that but I think
it's far more useful to say something as
pac-man company simply because if you
have the ability to take your fancy
language and talk to system libraries
and do system interaction then you have
something that is
potentially truly useful um I also have
you know right at the beginning the
instructions on how to install the thing
if you have the Haskell platform
installed over the room like this is
likely to have the Haskell platform
installed maybe they shouted a bit a few
times but there are there are binaries
available you can go and download and
all of the examples I'm going to present
in this talk all of them are available
online for you to play with and just try
out for yourself um so it's going to be
two parts I'm not going to assume that
anyone knows anything about a dress and
I know there's a few people might
actually just just for my own I don't
know vanity you're suppose a show of
hands on anyone who's giving it a go oh
actually that's quite surprising thank
you so I'm gonna say a little bit about
the syntax and just some of the basic
ideas of it and and hopefully even if
you have seen it before there will be
something new that you'll pick up but
what I want to get to is why I think
first-class dependent types so having
dependent types in the language right
from the start and built into the
language as an intentional feature is a
truly valuable thing to have and
hopefully you'll sell you know when you
when you're writing your your fancy
scala programs with with your type level
extensions you'll at least be thinking
okay how might this work if i was able
to express it with first-class types and
and maybe get a better understanding of
what's going on underneath so the
example i want to show you are the sort
of things that the sort of places what I
think verification has a good chance of
being useful in the short term so
realistically we're not going to be able
to say in the near future I've written
the program it type checks ship it it's
okay
but we are going to be able to sit there
are gonna be fragments of our programs
so where we're working on network
infrastructure or you know the core
components of our programs that we
really have to be confident I will
running avionics software we want to be
fairly sure that it it's doing the right
thing so those core components I think
in the near future we have a reasonable
chance of being able to use these kinds
of dependent type techniques to work in
those spaces I'm gonna give you some
idea of how we might be able to do this
using a language like address so I wanna
say a little bit about what I see types
is being useful for so I've titled this
talk type
development in Idris for two reasons
I've come to the second reason later on
the first reason is that I've seen a lot
of types over the last day or so and a
lot of people have said types are for
giving us confidence that the program is
correct if we if if the program type
checks we know that it's going to work
to a certain level of work and that's
great that is absolutely true thing is
there's so much more you can do with
types we should be using types not so
much as a way of having the machine tell
us when we've done something right we
should also be using types as a means of
guiding us towards the program that's
going to work so it's too easy to think
of you write your long program you
submit it to the type checker you know
you send it to your teacher for grading
and it comes back and says you know
three type errors see me after class
what we want to be doing instead is
thinking of the type checker as your lab
assistant so if you write the type first
and say okay
lab assistant this is what we're going
to do let's work on it together
every so often you might be able to say
okay I'm not sure how this program works
can you give me a clue rather than
rather than you know generate some code
and test because it looks like it might
be right and see if the type checker
accepts it so we'll see some examples of
how that goes as we get on to the
examples shortly and that's the sort of
mantra that I've started using we're
gonna see throughout his life
test-driven development has a red green
refactor we have type defined
refine I'm very sad that I couldn't find
a word for type that rhymes with defined
and refined by the way so if anybody has
one let me know so everything we do is
going to be either right or inspector
type define a function and we can define
functions that are possibly incomplete
we can say okay we have most of our
function and I'm going to leave a hole
for the bit of the function I haven't
written yet and then another thing we
can do is refine so I'm gonna say I'm
gonna use the word refine a lot we're
going to take a definition that's
possibly incomplete and refine it so it
either has a more complete definition or
a slightly more informative type and
basically everything we do comes into
into one of these three headings so
every time all the time think is it a
type are we defining are we refining and
I suppose we can add refactor at the end
once we have a working pro
we can safely refactor knowing that if
it continues to type-check it continues
to be okay so just before I get on to
the demo don't do a quick rundown of
some of the features Idris has because
it's kind of a kind of an FAQ people
always ask me firstly first class
dependent types so I say first class
here meaning that the syntax and and
semantics at the type level and the
value level are the same so there's no
there's no difference there's no sort of
barrier there's no barrier between the
two languages
it really is completely the same
language anything you can write in an
expression you can write in the type and
vice versa long as it type checks so
when you introduce functional
programming to people we often say that
functions are first class because it
means we can pass them around just like
any other value we can compete them just
like any other value well in the first
class type system same goes for types we
can compute them build them just like
any other value although Haskell
inspired syntax I sometimes regret that
because it means people think it should
work like Haskell various ways in which
it doesn't I just happened to like
Haskell syntax there's a few things that
have changed a little bit that I didn't
like too much like you know single : 4
types instead of a double colon that
kind of thing
it's a compiled language there are two
code generators that you get when you
install it one via C just running native
code one via JavaScript does have a
pluggable back-end system so you can you
can plug in if you if you if you have
it's exporting an interface to the
intermediate language so if you want a
JVM back-end then by all means go ahead
and write it I'm happy to help having
having precise types means that we get
optimizations too so we can read your
aggressive inlining aggressive eurasia
it seems to me that if if the compiler
knows more about the program what the
program supposed to do it should be able
to do more work at compile time to make
that program more efficient so things
like removing dynamic tests that are
unnecessary and so on um has tied
classes I bravely put like trait in
Scala hoping that was correct
is that correct
sort off yeah all right
it has tied masses it's essentially a
way of defining interfaces to a type
interfaces that say what a type is able
to do
unlike Haskell strict evaluation but if
you want lazy evaluation you can have
laziness as a type we won't actually get
to that in this talk I'm just saying
that because somebody always asks so
strict evaluation and there's various
bits and pieces to do foreign functions
system interaction
okay so mostly what I'm going to do
though is it's a bit of live hacking
because it's more fun if if I actually
show you things happening and it's also
more fun if instead of me just doing
stuff you you shout out questions of the
forum what if you do this that or the
other just to prove that I haven't made
this up if you want to shout out
suggestions and take this in a different
direction all right okay so what's the
answer for this question yes good let's
move on to something else then hmm I
guess actually I could just to just to
show you things compiling and running
because I know how familiar you are with
the sort of theoretical end of dependent
types but sometimes there are genuinely
people who think it type checks I don't
need to bother testing it because I
already know it works and to some extent
that's true but we do actually want to
ship these and sell these at some point
so I can sell you my hello world program
right I kind of compile it to an
executable and there we go so it's we
have a batch compiler that works in the
usual way we also have a read eval print
loop so again all that all the tools
that you're I guess you're familiar with
from from other languages so the first
thing I want to show you is the simplest
first-class type so if you don't get
what I mean by first-class types this
will hopefully make it more clear to you
what where the distinction really is
between types and values there isn't one
so I'm gonna start by writing a function
that takes a this is in the a from text
editor by the way so I've I've started
using the Adam text editor because I've
been using vim for talks and people say
to me afterwards that's very nice but I
wish I didn't have to use vim so I'm
using Adam just
you don't have to use it in I will
probably get my fingers in a tangle at
some point so Weiss when we do when we
do type driven development it's always
types first so what I've got in this
file is it a couple of types and we're
going to use the types to lead us to a
program so type first this this type
here it's going to be the type we
calculate it's gonna be if the boolean
is true we're gonna have it return for
boolean means singleton if it's true
we're going to return a singleton
natural number and if it's false not a
singleton we're going to return list of
natural numbers so what I do in assam is
is is i say okay i've got the type give
me a skeleton definition so this is a
ctrl alt a for add definition and it
gives me a skeleton definition so this
thing here list i bar HS this is a whole
so this is syntactically valid i can i
can load this into if I will load it
into the intro 0 to unity so I can load
this into the repple and and it will
happily load it and it will say okay
you've got a couple of holes um is that
color legible it's not really this I'll
turn the color off there is there is a
you in color by the way
right so um so we can a we can also
inspect the type of of this hole inside
inside atham so ctrl - t down the bottom
here it will give us a interaction
window that tells us what the result is
the thing we just asked there's a few
other things we can do here like we can
we can ask the documentation so if I
hover over net and hit ctrl or D it'll
give us the documentation from that tell
us what that comes from so there's
various useful bits and pieces that
allow us to interact with with the
system this is all Idris is doing all
the work here by the way this is Adam is
very thin has a very thin wrapper and
this means that you can easily adapt
this to your favorite text editor and
there are vim and Emacs modes okay so we
can also inspect where we write programs
by inspecting the possible values for
for input so so there singleton the
possible values for singleton here since
it's a bool in fact we can have a look
at what they are they're the possible
values are false and true so if I hit
ctrl alt c4k splits over singleton it
will split back into the two
possibilities and if you remember I said
before if it's false not a singleton
that's going to be a list of NAT and if
it's true it is a singleton it's a NAT
so why would we do this
why would we write functions to
calculate types well it's if we want to
use it in types so something we can do
is let let the types of later inputs be
calculated from the types of earlier
inputs so we're going to run this
function because this function returns a
type we're going to run it in the
context in a context where it's a type
is needed so some list here this is
going to sum either a list of things or
give the value of a natural number
depending on the value of singleton and
the next input so if I look at the type
of this hole will see that the inputs we
have our singleton which is a boolean
and X which is a list type calculated
from the value of that singleton so I
can't really make any progress here or
the only interesting thing I can do the
only thing I have available is to
inspect singleton I can't inspect X yet
because I don't know what type it is I
don't know what type it is until I run
this function so I'll do a case split on
singleton and if I now inspect that I'm
going look at the type of some list RHS
one so that's one of the holes that's
been created we know that singleton is
false X has typed this type singleton
sorry if I look at the type of this now
you'll see that it's refined the type of
X given that it now knows that in this
context singleton is false X must be a
list of NAT and you know correspondingly
if I do a case split it will give me the
cases for lists and in this other case
if I do the K split it will give me the
cases from that so what's happening here
is from one from the type of the value
of one input the machine has worked out
the value of the next input so I'm not
going to complete this definition but
I'm going to show you a definition where
this this sort of thing happens in for
example see you've all if you've ever
done any C programming you've used
exactly this trick when you use the
printf so I have also in this file I'll
show you the type of printf so the type
of printf this is exactly the same trick
we've just seen so it takes a format
string as an input and the return type
is calculated from this format string so
ready the type of printf descend s it'll
say okay that's a string to string or %
F identity okay that's it straight to
industry and so C compilers have to do
this through some compiler hacks to make
sure you've got the right formatted
string this is just an imperious so this
is the kind of the kind of thing you
might use first-class types for is if
you have some maybe some schema
description and that schema description
will calculate the valid types of your
database queries for example so just
scaling this up okay so that's hello
world example 1 hello world example 2 is
going to be vectors because it's always
vectors groans the reason we use vectors
so vectors are lists parametrized by
their length the reason we use vectors
as a hello world example is because
unlike printf they're genuinely useful
so so I'm always writing programs
certainly in Haskell where I make the
assumption that a list I have is
non-empty and that assumption is
completely valid for the program I've
just written and then 12 months later
violate that assumption in some other
file and I get a crash that was that was
unexpected so this is the kind of thing
that I would love to have available you
know it straightforwardly when I write
my Haskell programs so what happens with
a vector is you can you declare types
basically by giving a type constructor
that says how to build that type and
some data constructors to say how to
build the values in that type so nil
here is a vector with zero things and
cons is a vector which given a thing and
K things came or things will have
successor of casings so its successor of
pay s of K you can read that as 1 plus K
basically so in native a datatype
defined with constructors a 0 and 1 plus
than that the sort of thing you can do
once you have that is is well you you
can express in variants on the functions
you have over the list so if I have a
function that I want to apply a function
to two corresponding vectors so this is
the zip width function that do you have
any put you presume you must have an
equivalent in Scala
you've got everything it's got its bit a
called zip with yes good so this is
taking to corresponding this and there
is a question of what do you do if the
lists of different lengths so there's
some perfectly reasonable things you
could do here but it quite often other
than what you certainly when I use this
I make the assumption that the lists
really are the same length and if
they're not I should be doing you know I
should do something about that
beforehand so here I've expressed in the
type that the two vectors are coming in
are the same length and the vectors
going out is the same length and the the
the wonderful thing about a time driven
development is that given that I've
given that I've put a precisely enough
type for that function the machine can
tell me how this function is going to be
or give me some hints about how this
function is going to be written so what
I'll do first is I'll make the skeleton
definition so this is control of a as we
did before I could do a case split on
the on the possible input so I'll do a
case split on X's here and if I look at
the type of zip with RHS - we'll see
that wise so we've we've got
X's was an empty vector
and wise must be a vector with zero
things in it because X was so it's the
only thing Weis can be so if I do a case
split it will only give me the one
possibility it won't it won't even
suggest that I have to deal with the non
empty vector because it won't type check
and the fun thing about this is if I
look at the time to the right hand side
now you'll see I'm looking for a vector
zero things kind of fun that I can just
say to the Machine okay
just search for a possible solution and
well it's dead easy in this case it's
it's there's only one empty vector and
that's the empty vector so I'll do a
similar thing here I'm not gonna bother
thinking I'm just gonna hit case listen
expression search and well I think
that's the only reasonable answer to be
honest it can work the Machine thanks
you so this doesn't by the way this
doesn't free you from knowing what
you're doing it's kind of important to
look at the result of that function and
see that it's produced the answer that
you think is the answer cuz you know
that a lot of the sorts of things I use
this for in practice this kind of
expression searches is for tricky
monadic plumbing or you know wait you if
you have some type F of a in some type G
of B and you've got various ways of
getting from A to B but you can't figure
out how to do it normally I start by
expression search and see if the machine
can figure it out and often they can
figure out some of it but not all of it
and that's already a big help so this is
oh I'll do it I'll do another example of
vector I think this one's quite fun
because it really does demonstrate the
kind of so if I'm gonna try to transpose
a 2d 2d list basically and try to
transpose a 2-dimensional linked list
without the help of types I think it's
quite tricky I you know it's just if the
sort of problem I set to my data
structures and algorithms class I give
them that two-dimensional linked list
and make them transpose it and they hate
me for the rest of the university career
and I don't really blame them especially
given that we teach in Java
there I said it
that's nothing I shouldn't say on the
top that's videoed for the Internet is
gonna be a trouble man I read it
okay so transpose we're gonna do the
same thing so we've got we've got an N
by M vector and we want to give back an
N by n vector so this X is is a vector
of stuff I mean the only reasonable
thing I can do at this point the only
thing I have is X's so I'll do a case
split on it and in the first case so if
X's is an empty vector of so if X yeah
if the input was an empty vector of
stuff I have to transpose to a vector of
empty vectors so I can look at the type
just to see what the type of thing so I
should do it says I need to produce a
vector of M empty vectors now I can't be
bothered to do that immediately I'm
gonna but I'm gonna I'm gonna put
empties I'm gonna say you're right I'm
going to rename this whole two empties
and hit ctrl of L and what that does is
it lifts the function lifts a new top
level function with the type I need to
fill in that gap and I'm going to come
to this later then I'm gonna move on to
the interesting case so in the
interesting case what have I got so step
is it's always you know type define
refine write the type do some definition
look at any more types refine the
definition so I've I've done the type in
a defined step I've done a bit of
refinement here so let's look at the
type again so don't make any progress
until you've seen the types that you're
that you need to be working with so
let's look at the type of transpose of
vector RHS too so I have a vector of n
things that are X so this is the first
this is the first row so in fact you can
rename it because I gave a talk awhile
back and someone afterwards turn with me
and said they're very nice talk but why
do you functional program is always cool
things X there's a very good question
but here it's clearly a run it's a row
things so let's call it row and we have
we have a vector of K by vector of
anything so it's going to be much more
useful given that rogue is a vector of n
things and I need to produce a vector
event
it would be much more helpful if X's
with also a vector of n things now we
know how to turn a K by n thing into an
N by K thing we make a recursive call so
what I'm going to do is exactly that and
then ask the same question that's the
question again so the type now is so
there we are I have a vector of N Things
another vector of N Things and I need to
make a vector of n things but I tell you
what we did in zip with actually isn't
it week we took two vectors of N Things
we made a vector of n things and I don't
really want to worry about filling in
the details here so I'm just going to
lift out to a top level function so I'm
gonna write a helper function and it's
given me the type which is which is nice
obvious so so it's it's it's it's filled
in the call to this function I'm about
to write and now I'd given me a type and
I could do the usual thing as skeleton
definition case split before I happen to
know that I'm not gonna need X's so I'm
gonna delete it and let's just
well you might you might be able to
guess what I'm going to do here it's
kind of easy because I've done this
before but I happen to know that all I
have to do is okay split case split
search case splits search and that'll
help there and similarly for empties so
you'll notice here that there's a
there's an M in that there's a type
variable M and that's awkward because I
want to use M & M's in the type but hang
on
types are first class so what can I just
bring it into scope since its types are
first class I can I can just bring this
value from the type into the program and
again case place on there and this is
just going to recursively build an
appropriately length list of empty
vectors so you may not have followed
exactly what was going on in the program
there mostly cuz the machine was just
doing the thinking for us but if you
look at the tights here you can see
exactly what's going on from from the
top here you can see that if we can only
be making a transpose vector here I mean
there's we we could if we tried quite
hard we could make a transpose vector
containing the wrong things except we
couldn't because we haven't said
anything about LM LM is just a type we
know nothing about it except that it's a
thick so I guess we could be reversing
things or making them you know making a
mess of the structure at the same time
but really the only natural thing we're
going to be doing here is transposing
again if you look at the type 2 you'll
see that we have a row which is a vector
of n things we have a transpose thing
which is a vector of n things and you
can sort of if you squint a bit at the
type you can see well got an n look I've
got a thing and I've got K things I need
to make successor of casing so
essentially there's gluing the road on
to the front of the vector okay so I
should try I mean I should test that
shouldn't I because I mean a type
checked so we know it's going to work
but I've created a main program that
takes some dimensions of a vector invent
a vector and then transposes it for us
and so
this intro to actually why don't we use
a different code generator what could
possibly go wrong
Oh compiled so for rows and three
columns so that's a a vector of three
columns oh one two three four five and
so on and it's transpose them we believe
that transposed and just to prove that
that really was a PHP program doing that
last bit of a bit of a bit of
enterprise-ready PHP so if you ever need
it this is I actually wrote that PHP
backend for a bet but but you know
almost genuinely if you happen to be
writing a wordpress plugin as I'm sure
you do every day and you want to have
some kind of confidence that the
function there is some functional
correctness to your WordPress plugin
would you rather write it in PHP or in a
functional language I don't know well I
do know I'd rather write it in a
functional language okay so so much for
the introductory stuff how are you for
time ten minutes ten minutes okay so
that's a couple of hello world examples
what I want to show you to finish off is
is something a little bit more think
realistic of the sort of things you
might want to do is writing down state
machines or state transition systems and
making sure that you're properly
following the appropriate state
transition so this is the simplest one I
could think of that demonstrates the
point it's the door open and close state
machine so a door can either be in the
open State or the closed State so we'll
start in the closed State if the doors
closed were allowed to knock on it but
that doesn't change the state and if the
doors closed we're allowed to open it
and that changes the door state it
opened this particular door you're not
allowed to knock on it if it's open this
is a sliding door so the door vanishes
and if the doors open you're allowed to
close it so this is this might seem a
slightly familiar kind of API I mean
like file handling takes this this this
kind of so you open the file there's
certain things that you can do to file
when it's open there's certain things
you can do to follow into closed and
they're not necessarily the same and it
would be nice if in your API you could
properly express this kind of property
of when you're allowed to do certain
actions and what those actions do to the
state if you can characterize the state
of your system and in some abstract way
then you have some hope of reasoning
that it's that it's doing the right
thing so I'm not going to go through the
details of how this works exactly in a
dress I'm just going to show you the
types and hopefully the types will be
clear enough that you'll believe that
they really are expressing this door
system and for this I'm going to switch
back to them just to show that you can
have multiple editors also because we're
going to see error messages and I
haven't figured out how to get the error
message font they shouldn't ask them yet
but that's one nice thing about this
type driven approach by the way you
generally don't get a lot of error
messages because the Machine is only
giving you correct programs and when you
do get error messages you know exactly
where the error is because it's in the
tiny bit that you just wrote so I find
it very useful even when I do get error
messages rather than trying to figure
out what's going on by staring at the
program I tend to pull bits out of the
program and replace them with holes and
see if it starts working in I find that
a really helpful way to use types to get
me to the right program okay so this is
a representation of the door state
machine using so it's a library called
effect it's distributed with Idris and F
here I'm going to describe f as a kind
of device specific language for building
your own monad with as F is actually I'm
on earth it and it's it's it's allow
it's a library that allows you to
compose different kinds different bits
of stateful systems different bits of
effects in your system without having to
worry about the the plumbing of mono
transformers it also allows you to
change the
that'ss effects that you have available
as the system of the system progresses
so here we've said we've said in the
type of open door that it's an effectual
program it returns unit it starts with a
door in the closed State and it ends
with a door in the open State and closed
door is the other way around and then
Nakia says you can only run it to the
doors in the closed State and it doesn't
change it doesn't change the state so
this door program here is a type correct
therefore you know resource correct use
of that door protocol so if I do
something like knock and then close the
door if I basically what I'm trying to
do here is close the door when when it's
in the already in the closed State and
it says well it says it went wrong this
this bit here says it went wrong and
this bit down here is the thing that
tells us something useful so those that
there's a mismatch between the door
being it should have been open and it
was actually closed so yeah if I try to
open it twice this is a slightly more
readable error message we we have a
weight something with the error messages
are sometimes a bit more helpful
depending on if the system recognizes
the structure of what's going on so here
it says well you you did something that
required the door to be closed and
actually the door was open so you can
only open the door when it's closed so
now it type checks again because I'm
following the protocol properly so what
sorts of things
this is this is great that we can follow
the state machine but the problem here
is we have specified what those state
transitions were and we don't always
have control over the world
for example the door might Jam they
might there might be a problem with the
door it might eat you know oiling or
something so they don't like Jam so I
don't necessarily know when I open the
door if I'm in an open door state so
comparing with files you don't
necessarily know if you open a file if
you're going to have an open file after
you've done that you might have an error
so we really need to find out some kind
of way of expressing that in the type
system in order to have some reasonable
claim of safety
so fortunately having first class types
means that the things we put in the
types to say how the state transitions
work they're just programs so this is
the bit that I would love to see miles
do so now my open door site says okay
I've started in the closed door state
and instead of instead of moving on to
the open State I'm going to return the
jamb status of the door ran into
function from this Jambres of type of
jam and I will inspect that in the type
and if it comes back with jammed
then the door is closed if it comes back
with okay then the door is open so down
here I have a valid if I'd if I try the
thing like before it's gonna say no
sorry you can't do that
looks like you've slightly worse error
message than I was expecting but the the
point the things to look at is we have a
door that's open and it's well we need
to have a door that's open and we have a
door that isn't when we close it so
instead what we'll do is get we'll take
the the return value of opening the door
I'll sticker I'll stick a hole in here
for the rest of the program and if we
look at the type of that hole so vim has
all the interactive editing gadgets too
so I do backslash T to get the type so I
have this okay of type jamb and you'll
see that ok appears in the type so this
is a hint there to make some progress
here if we inspect the result of ok with
any luck this type is going to refine to
something useful that we can work with
so let's do that so I don't like writing
case blocks all right now so Chris
writes them for me so we will inspect
okay I'll do a case split on the result
of Oh boobs do a case lift on the result
of okay so in the case where the door is
jammed then
yeah yeah
Idris is doing all of the work here
which is good news for editor plugin
writers because you don't really want
your when you're writing an IDE you
don't really want to have to be
re-implemented the entire type system
again especially if the type system is
you know an evaluator too so yeah that
what happened here is that in in this
branch we know because the case analysis
went through the jammed case we know
that we have to calculate the the state
where the door is jammed so so the doors
closed and we need to be in a door
closed state by the way you'll notice
that I thought I put stood i/o here as
well so when we have effect 'fl programs
we can list the effects that are
available so it means I can do something
like you know some kind of cartoon
struggle noise and don't have another
crack at it and then that'll be okay
so in the okay case if we look at the
type here we'll see that we're in the
door open state we need to get to the
door closed state so there's no way this
this program is going to type-check
unless we actually close the door behind
us so we were not born in a field so
we'll close the door behind us and that
type checked so now this this is a valid
use a correct use of the of the door
protocol under the possible situation of
the door not closing properly just one
more thing before my final quick bit of
code quick example that I want to show
you is that this this kind of this kind
of thing where you're you're testing for
errors and dealing with the error and
error case and dealing with a success
case you could imagine some very deeply
nested code if this gets longer and you
know that you might you might think how
can you throw an exception and have a
handler so what I did instead is I I
decided to borrow a feature from Perl
I love saying that good for the reaction
so so you know the open file or die
syntax in Perl any Perl programmers yeah
you know that syntax so this is this is
kind of the same idea that you have you
have a main path that you work through
and then this alternative is it this
this is only called it in the event that
open door doesn't match okay so I can
quite happily have a load of opening and
closing the door and and that's fine
right so why would you do this sort of
thing sort of reason you might do this
is if you have a system where there are
rules and those rules change
so some complicated real system whether
those the current state dictates the
kind of things you're allowed to do like
for example the game of hangman so the
game of hangman the state is it's
reasonably simple in hangman so this is
a you yeah I tried explaining the rules
of hangman and that the back story
behind hangman in some documentation and
I couldn't do it I had to call it
mystery word because it was just
sounding far too gory so the idea is
you're guessing letters and you're
getting letters in a word and if you
guess correctly you want to get down to
no letter still to guess and you don't
want to get down to no guesses available
so I have captured the possible state of
the hangman game by saying okay a game
is either running with some guesses and
some letters or it's not running so this
is kind of like our door opened or
closed we've got two different states
it's just that one of the states has has
a bit more information in it so that's
not what to worry too much about the
exact details of how that's represented
but the important point of this the
important function in this system is if
we get a letter that letter is either
going to be in the word or not in the
word and that's going to change the
state of the game depending on whether
we were right or not so guess isn't
guessing a character is an effect FFEL
program that returns true or false it
can only work if we have some guesses
available
it can only work if we have things still
to guess and it will either come back
with guests still available and a letter
gone or a guest gone and and the same
number of the same number of things to
guess and eventually we get down to the
main program we get down to the main
program we see that a hangman game is
something which starts in the running
state with some guesses available and
maybe some words and it ends in the not
running state so soon somehow this
program is going to have to get to a
game that's either won or lost or or
abandoned there's no other way out of
this we have to we have to do one of the
other one of the other by the way when I
first wrote this I gave it a slightly
different type I gave it this type and
so this this is this is a slightly
different precondition that says the
words that we give it has to have at
least one letter in it and there was
nowhere in the program that I bothered
checking that the strings I was reading
had one letter in it and so the Machine
said sorry you can't have rest I thought
that was actually quite lovely because
that's the kind of silly mistake I make
all the time and it's the sort of thing
that you think well types can't help you
with that
well I think they can another mistake I
made is to given that the two things
number of letters and a number of
guesses are numbers so here we've got a
guest if it's true
then it prints the message false and
prints a message this really happened as
well I got the wrong I got the wrong
variable and because they've changed the
wrong bit of state it told me well it
told me it went wrong but if you if you
period this for a minute or so you can
see exactly what went wrong and actually
it should have been I guess so I want a
list of words just to show that there's
some type inference available so that I
can't be bothered to give the list of
this word
I'm just waiting patiently for someone
to complain at me there this that so
there's a length of the string and the
Machine of the cell tower what you say
to the Machine you work out the length
of this list so I spotted the problem
with this list of words yes
scarlet isn't it
so because that compiles and runs we
know we are gonna get a ser getting this
hangman
so quite amusing if it pickets Karl in
there wouldn't it sadly not we're gonna
lose anti Oh probably basic yay good
right
so oh just one final thing nothing at
that time I do want to show you my
partial proof of pac-man completeness I
haven't I haven't evolved this at all
since I first showed it a couple years
ago so you'll get an impression for the
speed of the address system when I do
this not necessarily in a good way so
this is this is a program that uses the
effects library to to manage the state
of a space invaders game so that where
the aliens are where the scrotie star
field is where the bombs are all of that
the bottleneck here by the way is GCC so
I need to figure out how to have to fix
that and there we are so we're blasting
blasting assignment signs out of the sky
here so rip soap Mandy went there anyway
you know for that
so why do we care safety safety is
something that people always talk about
with types we care about safety but
there's so much more we can write
expressive api's we can write generic
programs we can use the types to help us
get to the right program that's what
types are really for and if you're
interested in learning more you can
learn more even have a special secret
code if you want to know the special
secret code which is 39 Brady by the way
then you can get a discount on this so
if you want to learn more it's not ready
yet I mean there's only two chapters
written but it will be in progress over
the next year or so and all of the ideas
that I've just presented you'll get in
in some more depth
okay thank you very much unfortunately
there's no more time for questions but I
want to thank